A: Yes, it was all silent. I was given three rules by the guards: Must be silent, no movement, no putting anything on the table. I had no intention of speaking anyway.


[after teasing him for his time--8 minutes--and asking if it was scary]
It seemed longer! I didn't think is was scary; I found it more meditative and using highly subtle body movements to communicate back and forth. Afterwards, I couldn't look at anything like art.

I definitely recommend it. Everything is part of the performance (like waiting in line, watching and actually sitting). It reminds me more on the idea of power in the role of the sitter.The only thing I didn't like was the gallery attendants giving the sitters instructions ("No big movements! Just sit down and enjoy the moment!") Honestly, I started to tear a little bit in front of Abramovic.


I did this - I happened to be in Midtown just after MoMA opened, and the line didn't look very long that day, so I got in line. The wait ended up being about two and a half hours - bring a book if you're planning on doing this.

But the actual experience: well, you're in the middle of the atrium at MoMA, which is a big space, and there's a lot of light on you. There are also video cameras (and monitors) on three sides. It's an inherently theatrical space, though you forget that surprisingly quickly.

It's an odd experience - because it's hard to look at someone for a long time, this just isn't how we behave in polite society with people we don't know. But here you're supposed to stare; when you move to the center, you're also being stared at by the crowd, but you forget about that. By the time I got to her, Abramovic looked very tired - this was about three weeks into the exhibit, and four hours into the day. The image that kept coming to mind is of the suffering Christ - one of Antonello da Messina's in particular - where tiredness & suffering are intertwined, as is the idea that he's the victim for the onlookers, which seems kind of germane to what she's doing. There is something a bit unsavory in that - I don't know what I think about the way she's presenting herself as a suffering victim, especially as she's now a marquee name & MoMA is paying her a great deal of money for the performance. (Kafka's "A Hunger Artist" comes to mind.) But she is clearly suffering, that's not an act - and looking at her, you find yourself implicated in that suffering. It's a confusing situation, because there are a lot of things at play. Looking at her, you realize that what she must be seeing is very different from what you're seeing.

There's also, of course, the physiological impact of looking at one thing for a long time. You lose track of time - I really had no idea how long I was up there. I found myself in a weird, dream-like state, almost drifting in & out of sleep: it takes a surprising amount of concentration to just look at someone.




http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ASS7xMOM1EE



http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tCyN5JzaQQI&feature=related





Sit silently with the artist for a duration of your choosing. So the instructions read on a small plaque on the 2nd floor atrium of the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA). Behind the plaque, a queue forms of visitors eager to enter a large square space—demarcated only by tape on the floor—and sit down at a wooden table across from a dark-haired woman in a navy blue dress that conceals every part of her body save her face and her hands.

The woman is the pioneering artist Marina Abramovic (whose retrospective is on the 6th floor concurrently), but less than a third of the people in line have any sense of this woman’s indelible impact on contemporary art. I, on the other hand, queue with an anthology of her performances scrolling through my head. Watching her from afar, I look to see the courage and fearlessness that must abound in a woman capable of incising the star of David on her stomach, screaming until she loses consciousness, and living in a gallery for 12 days without food. Strangely, she doesn’t seem reckless at all, but peaceful and wise. I then remember she trained with Tibetan Buddhists and has said she’s able to transcend the limits of her own body and mind through meditation. She’ll need these skills now more than ever as she attempts her longest performance-to-date, sitting at this table for every hour of every day that her retrospective is open at MoMA. No food. No water. No breaks.

So, I queue for my moment with the artist, a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. A young girl is sitting across from Marina and the two seem engaged in a staring contest, though from that distance it’s impossible to tell if they’re actually making eye contact or simply staring ahead in a daze. Seventy-five minutes later she finally stands up and exits the square declaring she lost all sense of time and thought it had only been a few minutes. Marina leans forward and closes her eyes, while the next steps forward and takes the empty seat. Marina sits up and another staring contest commences—this one lasting sixty-seven minutes. This process repeats, ten minutes, fifty-five minutes, twenty minutes, forty-five minutes. Finally, the man in front of me takes the seat and I’m next. More than three hours from when I entered the queue I’ve seen only six people participate in the performance and more than thirty leave the line in frustration. The nameless, faceless strangers I queued with hours ago are now friends—an artist from Poughkeepsie, an art history undergrad from Chicago, a nurse from outside Philly—and we share our excitement as our turn approaches. Finally, after nearly four hours, my time has come. I enter the square and approach the table, immediately noting the heat of the lights and the watchful eyes of the crowds gathered to gawk at the spectacle. I put my purse on the floor and take a seat. While Marina leans forward, I settle into the chair and imagine I’ll last about ten minutes before I become either bored or totally uncomfortable. She begins to sit up and I try to prepare myself for the moment she opens her eyes. I have many skills but sitting still and being silent are not traits I’m known for, so I was afraid: afraid of the judgment implicit in staring, afraid of the silence, afraid I wouldn’t have the transformative experience that had captivated those before me, afraid, afraid, afraid. Her lids opened and our eyes locked, not in a stare but in a friendly gaze. For the first few minutes, I thought only about who this woman was—a renegade, a feminist, an inspiration—but quickly realized that those things were more about her persona than the person. I discarded my preconceived notions and expectations and, as soon as I stopped thinking of her as an artist-celebrity, saw the woman behind the legend. We sat absolutely still in deafening silence, exchanging energy, and just being with each other. I’ve heard it said that couples married for decades can sit in silence and understand one another perfectly, but I’d never imagine that sort of intimacy could be possible between two total strangers. It is.






My only barometer of how early to arrive was Jenna’s Jezebel article, mentioning that her arrival - though unsuccessful - was a little before 10:30 AM.  I figured my anticipated arrival 90 minutes before MoMA opening would be enough.  I briskly walked 25 blocks from my interim Union Square residence before the streets crowded with commuters, panic hit, and I dove underground to catch the N to 49th Street.  This is a commute I never thought I’d do again.  I brushed bittersweet nostalgia aside to skip up the steps and continued walking, spotting the MoMA banners as I walked up 53rd Street.

The line did not seem particularly substantial…however, it had just enough people for me to be concerned about whether or not I would actually sit with her.  The person in front of me held my place in line so I could ask the first person their arrival time.  And he held it again so I could more accurately counted the number ahead of me.  The crowd in front of me began to swell.  People gasp! cut in line? or returned to their place?!?! with bagels and drinks for their friends in queue.  My small glint of hope was rapidly diminishing.

Line is about 35 deep and average sit is about 20 minutes

At 9:30, the line started moving.  The guards had opened one of the revolving doors, then another.  People raced to the ticket line, the will-call line, and to the actual line for Marina, marked off by a red velvet rope and guard. I opted to queue for the latter.  ” “Does everyone have tickets?” the guard asked.  All the people in front of me raised their hands, white tickets and MoMA membership cards in their fists.  My stomach turned: I was ticketless as was the man in front of me.  I graciously held the spot in line for the man in front of me to buy his ticket.  Instead, he did not return at all.  I stayed the course.

“Excuse me,” the girl behind me told the girl in front of me.  “If you actually get the chance to sit with Marina, I hope you’ll take the two of us into consideration.  Because we were actually in front of you outside, thanks.”

Wow.  I hadn’t even noticed, although the line in front of me was much longer than the supposed 35 from outside.  The girl in front of me sheepishly allowed us ahead of her.

By this time, however, the guard had let in one small batch of people at the front of the line, and then another. There was at least 15-20 people ahead.

“We don’t have a chance,” someone announced behind us, an Asian male art student with black framed glasses.  “They’ve let in the first 30 people.  Even if each only spends 20 minutes with Marina [the average, oft-quoted sit time], we still don’t have a chance.”

The guard repeated this same statement moments later, opened the red velvet rope he commandeered, and let us sit at the bottom of the steps leading to the second floor.  The amorphous line became an amorphous blob.  We were resigned to being the first to view ‘The Artist is Present’ that morning.



In the distance, I saw 8? 10? people already at the velvet rope.  My whole body vibrated.  How long would they take?  A handful were dressed in black, thin and young.  Two girls.  An older gentleman.  Did they impatiently open the 54th street doors first in all of our stalling?


“Everyone feels nervous.  So here are the rules: sit still, don’t talk to her, you have to maintain eye contact the entire time.”
“Do I have to sit a certain way?”
“No you do not have to sit a certain way.”
“Okay.”
“Okay.”
Beat.  “You can go.”